draft post on exception encoding (#209)
BuckleScript/bucklescript.github.io: website/blog/2020-05-06-exception-encoding.md

---
title: A story of exception encoding in BuckleScript
---

> In the master branch of our compiler, we made some significant improvement in exception encoding: it gives all ReasonML/OCaml exceptions a clear stack-trace when it is thrown. This is particular important when you have some code running in production so that collect those stacktrace for diagnostics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We just recently made some significant improvements with our new exception encoding and we find it so exciting that we want to highlight the changes and explain a little bit how exceptions work when compiling to JS.

The new encoding allows us to provide proper, clear stacktrace information whenever a Reason/OCaml exception is thrown. This is particular important when you have some code running in production that needs to collect those stacktrace for diagnostics.
 
Now let's get into the details how we changed things up!
```

## Why it is tricky to preserve stack-trace in ReasonML exception

> In the native backend, the stacktrace handling mechanism is different from JS. In JS VM, the stacktrace is collected immediately when an Error object is thrown, while in native, such data is not attached to the exception object at all, stacktrace collecting in native is highly coupled with runtime support. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever you are using a Reason / OCaml exception (a so called "native exception"), you are actually using a data structure which is not the same as a JS runtime exception. That means that each exception representation invoke different stacktrace handling mechanisms:

In JS, the stacktrace is collected immediately when an Error object is thrown, while in native Reason / OCaml, such data is not attached to the exception object at all (you can't just access `e.stack` to retrieve the stacktrace). This is because collecting the stacktrace in a native environment highly depends on the runtime support (e.g. if a flag was provided to attach the stacktrace data).
```

> So, to preserve a clear stacktrace we need change the encoding of the exception in ReasonML to better fit JS use case, this is part of our on-going work to choose optimal encoding for all ReasonML data types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to change that and provide ways to get the same stacktrace for native exceptions as you would with JS exceptions. This is all part of our on-going work to plan and implement the optimal encoding for all the different ReasonML data types for the JS runtime (like with our previous changes to the `bool`, `unit` and `records` representation as well).
```

> 

Reviewer: To give you a better understanding on the technical parts, let's compare the old native exception representation to the new one and see how we can benefit from better stacktraces.

Author: will make a picture for this

## What's the classical ReasonML exception encoding?

> In ReasonML, exception is structured data, take the two exception definitions below, for example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In ReasonML, an exception is basically structured data. Let's have a look at the two exception definitions below:
```

```reasonml
exception A of { x : int , y : string}
exception B
```

> `exception A` is encoded as an array of 3 slots, the first slot is a block by itself called identity block, while the second slot is for field x and the third slot for field y.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`exception A` is encoded as an array of 3 slots. The first slot is a block by itself (called an *identity block*), while the second slot is for field x and the third slot for field y.
```

`exception B` is just the identity block.

> The identity block is an array of 2 slots whose first slot is a string like "B", while the second slot is a unique integer, such array in native also has a magic tag 248 for other purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The identity block is an array of 2 slots. The first slot is a string like "B", while the second slot is a unique integer. 
In more detail, the native array will also have a magic tag 248 attached which is not relevant for our purposes though.
```

> Previously we more or less faithfully do the similar encoding in BuckleScript compiler, but it is no longer case,  now it is much simplified, take two exception values below for example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What's the new exception encoding?

We had to simplify and unify the encoding for the different exception cases to make it possible to compile exceptions into an object instead of an array. Let's take a look at the two exception values below for example:
```

```reasonml
A ({ x : 1, y : "x"}
B
```

> It will be compiled into

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The two values will be compiled into
```

```js
{RE_EXN_ID : "A/uuid", x : 1, y : "x" }
{RE_EXN_ID : "B/uuid"}
```

> exceptions with or without payload share the same encoding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, all exceptions (no matter with or without payload) share the same encoding.
```

What will happen when you raise an exception?

```reasonml
raise (A {x : 1 , y : "x"})
````

> 

Reviewer: Compiling to following JS:

```js
throw {RE_EXN_ID: "A/uuid", x : 1 , y : "x", Error : new Error ()}
```

> Here the compiler attached a stacktrace here, it is much simpler since now we compile exception value into an object instead of an array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see in the compiled output that we can now attach the stacktrace very easily, since every exception is now an object instead of an array. Really cool!
```

## Caveat

> Don't rely on the key name of `RE_EXN_ID`, it is an implementation detail which you should not rely on and it is subject to be changed into a symbol in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that it's not allowed to rely on the key name of `RE_EXN_ID`. It's an implementation detail which will probably be changed into a symbol in the future.
```

## Bonus

> With such nice encoding, a hidden feature called [extensible variant](https://caml.inria.fr/pub/docs/manual-ocaml/extensiblevariants.html) is much more useful. exception in ReasonML is a special instance of extensible variant, they share the same encoding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With our nice new exception encoding, a hidden feature called [extensible variant](https://caml.inria.fr/pub/docs/manual-ocaml/extensiblevariants.html) is now way more useful. This  is because a native exception in ReasonML is actually a special instance of an extensible variant. They share the same encoding, so both benefit from the new changes!
```
